Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to continue looking at unique factorization and
move towards this idea that maybe there is a
little bit of a problem with this famous theorem
once we move beyond our familiar numbers to bigger
and bigger numbers okay so the fundamental theorem
of arithmetic it's sometimes called the unique
factorization theorem going back to Euclid states
that every natural number n bigger than one is
uniquely factorizable into primes and equals P
1 P 2 P K and when we say uniquely means upto
rearrangement so for example here's a number
it's a primitive natural number which we can
think of as being 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 11 111
111 check that that factors as the product of
the number 1 1 1 times 1 1 1 1 1 more familiar
kind of example in the hindu-arabic numeral system
so here is a rather big number in our usual base
10 arithmetic and here is its factorization
into primes it happens to be 3 squared times
22 thousand one hundred ninety three times this
biggest prime here so now let's move to the realm
of a bigger number so here's an example with so
natural number of primitive natural number kind
of arithmetic here's an example of hindu-arabic
numeral kind of arithmetic sort of a medium-sized
situation right here now let's move to this range
of bigger numbers where typically we like to talk
about Zed which I remind you is 10 triangle 10
plus 23 and due to the efforts of a few people
but including probably Joel sugaring we now know
that this thing has some prime factors and the
smallest of its prime factors are 313 139 673
18300 one for hundred and thousand 109 and this
number here which is twenty-seven million nine
hundred ninety seven thousand and three hundred
seventy three so this thing has a factorization
at least that begins with these primes but then
of course is this quotient here which is maybe
somewhat problematic to write down and there's
still of course a huge amount of work involved
in trying to break that down into primes and
what I claim is that that latter part of the
job is ultimately impossible that that will
elude us that it's not possible to factor that
so that Z itself this number here does in fact
not have a prime factorization so contrary to the
unique factorization theorem which is ostensibly
a you know a major solid result that everybody
believes in contrary to that I claim that this
particular exact number here does not have a prime
factorization and I am almost surely correct now
we've seen quite a lot of examples of this basic
idea that as we move to bigger and bigger numbers
more and more aspects of our familiar arithmetic
start to break down that's just the reality of the
way the world is so we've seen that for example
even a very simple kind of question you have two
biggish numbers expressed in some fashion perhaps
using Exponential's or towers and Exponential's
sums products and so on you have two of these
expressions even deciding which of these two
is bigger is in principle quite a complicated job
it's not so easy to do the arithmetic operations
themselves are even hard to define how does one
define the sum of two big numbers how does one
prove the laws of arithmetic for those big
numbers as well as another question and even
our definitions of natural number and in fact
prime are a little bit subject to interpretation
and so we've seen that when we are talking about
natural numbers we have at least three different
realms in which we might be considering things we
can think about these primitive natural numbers
which are just bunches of ones basically multi
sets or we can think about hindu-arabic numerals
and the familiar hindu-arabic did this 0 up to 9
or we can think in this more general fashion but
more loose fashion involving these expressions
involving towers possibly or maybe other kinds
of operations or symbols so there's a range
of possibilities about deciding what actually
a natural number means and correspondingly
we'll see that it's not also entirely clear
what a prime number should mean there is possible
disagreement that emerges once you get past our
familiar numbers into the range of bigger numbers
about what exactly we're talking about when we
talk about a prime number and unfortunately most
of the theorems including unique factorization
then we are familiar with that we are happy with
in our zone the zone of smallish or medium-sized
numbers the numbers that we can compute with and
that our computers can compute with most of these
theorems become problematic as we head out to
bigger and bigger numbers I'm sorry but that's
just the way the world is but this is not the
end of the world okay we don't have to despair
and give up mathematics ok we can accept that
there are certain ranges of applicability of
our theories and that when we go outside those
ranges then perhaps our theories don't work so
there's still a huge range of interesting numbers
an interesting range of numbers for example for
which number theory works very well so if we zoom
out a little bit and ask well why is it that the
unique factorization breaks down when we get to
bigger numbers I think we could maybe say it this
way that the proof of the factorization theorem
crucially ignores complexity so issues of complex
the not incorporated into the discussion they're
ignored and that's really a key weakness so when
you're doing number theory and you're moving
towards bigger and bigger numbers there are
really two formidable foes that await you that you
have to do battle with one is magnitude the fact
that the numbers are getting bigger and they're
getting harder to deal with and harder to write
down and harder to compute with but the other
is that also the complexity of things is going
up now magnitude and complexity are related but
they are essentially different kinds of things
okay and if one of these doesn't overwhelm us the
other one probably will so we can battle one but
then the other one takes advantage of us and so
on so we can bound complexity but then magnitude
blows out or we can bound magnitude and then
complexity blows out these are very general kinds
of statements I'm not being very precise here I
admit but there's a kind of an idea here that even
in mathematics there are limits okay there are
bounds there are constraints as to what actually
we can do and what how far we can go so now let's
turn our attention to this question of how do we
factor a number given a natural number and how in
fact do we go about factoring it so there's a very
fundamental problem in number theory Gauss very
prominently mentioned that it was an important key
problem and it's it's been an important problem
obviously since the Greeks and it's it's not easy
to do it's not easy to factor numbers and that's
sort of evident even by hand and if I write down
a number of several thousand and ask you to
factor it well maybe you can do it easily but
maybe it takes quite a lot of time so there's a
naive way okay and the naive way which is still
quite a reasonable way is to search for Prime's P
that divide n okay basically you sequentially go
through your list crimes starting with two and
then three and then five and then seven and so
on and you just check whether your number n is
divisible by any of these primes one after the
other and you can do this in a variety of ways you
can do it either by division by direct division or
perhaps by modular arithmetic kinds of ideas and
so you go through here and you checked the primes
until you get to a prime Q in this list where the
square of Q is bigger than n so once you've gotten
to sufficiently far in this list that the prime
has a square which is bigger than n then you can
stop if you haven't found a prime up till then
you can conclude that your number is actually
prime another reason of course is because if there
are any prime factors then one of them had better
be less than Q if Q squared is bigger than n and
both factors are bigger or equal to Q then their
product will be bigger than n and so we can be
assured that any prime factors will have to be
found before we get to such a prime Q ok so if we
don't find a prime then we can conclude that n is
itself prime but if we do find a factor P at some
point which divides n then we compute the quotient
and over P call that M and then we go back and
start the same procedure but now with a smaller
number M instead of the number n but we also maybe
don't start at the beginning anymore because we've
already checked up to the Prime's P so we should
start with the prime P in our investigation of
which Prime's divided M so this is the sort of
recursive little loop that we do we look for a
prime if you find a prime that divides then we
divide look at the quotient and then we carry on
trying to divide that quotient by further problems
okay so that's a very sort of simple minded
straightforward idea of how to factor a number so
for example suppose you were asked to factor 3009
enterprise so we look at this number we start to
divide it by the smallest primes it's clearly not
divisible by two because it's not an even number
it's divisible by three because the sum of the
digits is 12 which is divisible by three so we
know that three is a factor so we take this number
we divide by three to get a thousand and three
and then we have to look at a thousand and three
and try the various numbers so five is obviously
not a factor because it doesn't end in zero or
five seven well we'd have to divide by seven and
see that in fact there is a remainder eleven it's
not divisible by 11 this little sort of a trick
for that it was divisible by eleven then some of
these two digits would have to equal some of these
two digits the next one thirteen well you have to
check that directly and it's not divisible by 13
and then when you get to 17 you do find that it's
divisible by 17 you do the division thousand of
3 divided by 17 and you get 59 and you recognize
that that's a prime so you can stop and you found
the prime factorization so for a bigger example 5
2 2 5 2 2 factoring that this case it's an even
number so the first thing to do is to strip out
that factor of 2 times 2 61 to 61 now here the
sum of the digits is 9 plus 9 that's 18 which
is not only divisible by 3 it's actually divisible
by 9 and that tells us that this thing is actually
divisible by 9 so we can take out the factor of 9
and then when we divide we get 29,029 ok and then
the next prime to try would be 5 well obviously
it's not divisible by 5 then if you try 7 you see
that you would get 7 times 4140 7 in this case it
is divisible by 11 because 7 plus 1 equals 4 plus
4 that's a little trick to see that's divisible
by 11 so 11 is a factor and then you get 377
left over notice that the 9 is written now as 3
squared because we wanted to write it as a product
of primes and then finally factoring this thing
here we would find that is 13 times 29 again just
checking the next prime just thirteen and it does
divine and that's the quotient and now we have it
all in terms of primes okay for our third example
here is a bigger number here's 45 million three
hundred and thirteen thousand 139 if you had to
do this by hand it would not at all be as easy as
the previous one because it's no longer a product
of a lot of little primes the little Prime's are
obviously the easiest to find quickly and whenever
you have one of them you're happy because then
when you do the quotient you have a significantly
smaller number to work with this number happens
to be the product of the primes five thousand
seven hundred and seventy nine and seven thousand
eight hundred and forty one these are roughly
about the same size and this is typically the
toughest factorization case when you have a number
which is a product of two big Prime's especially
if the primes are reasonably equal in size so if
you're going to use this technique on this well
you'd have to go through all the primes from two
up to five thousand seven hundred and seventy nine
before we actually found this prime factor that's
a lot of divisions or divisibility is to check of
course your computer would have no problem but
your eye would find this a little bit onerous
but if we had a table of primes in front of us in
fact it would might take us a couple of hours or
something like this all right now let's talk about
some tougher examples with some bigger numbers and
for this I've got in my computer to help me so
on my computer I have my program that I used to
write papers called scientific workplace it's a
very nice program and inside it it has a little
computational engine that will do some number
theory for me so this is not a package that's
no gear to doing number theory problems it just
happens to be able to do this as part of being
able to do many other things but already we can
see that well this is interesting things happening
here I think when we try to factor big numbers so
here is a number that I've cooked up I've cooked
this number up by first of all finding two prime
numbers with ten digits that's actually reasonably
easy to do because I just write down a ten digit
number and then I ask my computer to find the next
prime people find the next prime that's bigger
than the number I've written down so that's how I
got those two primes so I've multiplied those two
Prime's together and then I've asked the computer
to factor this number now the computer can't
remember that I just computed this this way or
at least it pretends that it can't remember and so
it has to think a little bit but it doesn't take
long to figure this out it's certainly much less
than a second okay these are two ten digit Prime's
it can find the factorization of that product in
less than a second if I do the same game with two
15 digit numbers so I create two 15 digit Prime's
multiply them together there we have the product
and ask my computer to factor that one has to
think for a little while it has to think for
about a second and after a second of thinking
it will come up with the correct factorization
it's very impressive okay what about say two 20
digit Prime's well we play the same game there
is the product of these two 20 digit Prime's and
now my computer has to think for a while and it
thinks for a roughly a minute after roughly a
minute of thinking and computing it will come
up with these factorizations so these are pretty
big numbers right we're talking about you know
numbers here's ones thousands millions billions
trillions quadrillions or whatever there this is
a very big number and it's not too likely that our
computer is going through all the problems one by
one doing divisibility so it probably has some
more clever way of factoring things so powerful
modern computers can factor products of two primes
each hundreds of digits long and that's sort of
where we are roughly a couple hundred digits long
were in the ballpark for being able to factor if
things get much bigger than that then we run into
problems of course this is a crucial issue for
modern internet security you've probably all heard
of RSA encryption methods that rely crucially on
our ability to write down something that nobody
else knows so that if we write down two products
of prime numbers which are let's say 500 digits
long then that product is something that we know
the factorization of but nobody else knows the
factorization because no computer can factor a
number which is a product of two primes say there
are 500 digits long at least currently so this
kind of this kind of aspect of things even though
it seems very sort of obscure and you know very
lofty with these big numbers is actually very
very important for modern encryption issues and
security on the internet say so this is a very
important problem these days ok so I just want
to mention briefly so the basic idea for some
of these more complicated more powerful methods
of factorization rather than sort of just brute
force so there is something called a quadratic
sieve quadratic sieve methods and here's the
underlying idea it uses crucially a modular
arithmetic basically ideas that I think probably
go back to firma so the idea is to compute what
they were trying to factor n we compute a squared
mod n for lots of numbers a so we pick an a so n
is some big number you want to factor it and you
pick some number a which is also relatively big
and you compute a squared mod n ok that's easy
to lose it's just modular arithmetic subtracting
multiples and so on doing some bit of division and
you look to see if you can find a case where the
remainder is actually a square itself ok most of
the time it won't be a square but every so often
it'll be a square and when it's a square then you
are in a happy situation by understanding what
this equation really means so suppose that we've
tried lots of A's and we have found now in a such
an a squared mod n is actually a square let's say
B squared what this means is that the difference
between a squared and B squared is actually a
multiple of n that's what it means for this thing
ma tend to be that they differ by a multiple of n
but a squared minus B squared factors pleasantly
as this product a plus B times a minus B so we
have a plus B times a minus B equals K n now
if you think about a prime factor P for n we're
trying to find a prime factor P for n any prime
factor P of n has to divide this left-hand side
and by Euclid's lemma it must therefore either
divide this or divide this so any prime factor P
of n is also a factor of a plus B or a minus B and
that means that you now have two numbers that
you know this unknown prime divides it divides
n and it divides either a plus B or a minus B so
if you find the greatest common divisor of n and
a plus B right so these two numbers which you
know they have a greatest common divisor and if
you find that then this mystery prime P must be
contained in there as a factor so what you do is
you compute the greatest common divisor of a plus
B and N and also the greatest common divisor of
a minus B and N and you do that using exactly the
Euclidean algorithm that I talked about the other
day where you take it's like when we were talking
about the step of size 19 and step of size 26 you
may remember then we want to divide 26 by 19 and
we got you know remainder of seven and then you
divided nineteen by seven you got a remainder of
whatever it was so you keep on going down until
the last non-zero remainder in that procedure is
then the greatest common divisor in the cases that
we looked at that was always one but it doesn't
have to be one if it's something different than
you have a greatest common divisor and there
will be a greatest common divisor because at
least for one of these because a prime P dividing
that has to divide one of those two things so
this is a very cool method I'll leave you to see
but you can even play around and actually try it
out yourself and the quadratic sieve is based
essentially on this and you know elaborations
and refinements of it so there are more advanced
techniques for factoring and they are reasonably
powerful but still there's a very clear kind
of limit with modern technology to the sizes
of numbers that we can you know for sure factor
and of course that limit is being pushed up all
the time as our computers get more powerful and
as our algorithms get more powerful but still we
have to be aware that currently there are these
very clear kind of limits to factoring numbers
in general so even with our powerful computers
today we still struggle to factorize products
say of two hundred digit primes now let's
think about Zedd for a minute okay Zedd is a
completely different ball game here Zedd is not
just a product of a couple of two hundred digit
primes we are talking about ten triangle ten plus
twenty three this is vastly bigger than any of the
numbers we've written down and in factoring this
is just just orders of magnitude more complicated
in fact it's it really is not just it's not
just a scaling factor that we can hope to you
know overcome by more technology there's really
something qualitatively different about about Z
because it's so big and so let me remind you very
roughly of the complexity issue okay that and
that's really at the heart of the problems here
so I remind you that when we were talking about
complexity of a natural number we had this idea of
triangular complexity roughly how many symbols you
need to express a number using familiar arithmetic
operations addition multiplication exponentiation
and also the triangle operation and if we then
plot n here and the complexity of n here we get
some graph which you know very very roughly looks
something like this as n gets big and this is hard
to make a reasonable scale here this is some kind
of sort of logarithmic kind of scale if this was
really to scale here's ten trying a line and here
is Zed Zed is ten trialed then tenth Rygel 9 would
be infinitesimally close to here we wouldn't see
anything so I'm expanding things a little bit here
so let's say here is roughly ten triangle mine
and maybe in this direction here's 10 Toronto mine
expanded up there may be 10 triangle 4 here it
was very loose kind of diagram so as your number
gets bigger course the complexity generally gets
big and once we get you know in this range around
the 10 triangle 10 once we get numbers which are
roughly that size then their complexity is almost
all going to be 10 triangle 9 which is the number
of digits required to write down your typical
number in this range so you choose the number at
random from 1 to Z chances are its complexity is
very close to 10 trying online but this complexity
function is unpredictable occasionally it plummets
dramatically once you get to say a triangle
number like once you get to triangle 9 plus
triangle 5 then suddenly comes plummeting now it
comes plummeting down to a very small complexity
actually just enough 10 or something like this
which is very very close to zero and we we talked
about how the num that are expressible in our
visible universe in the observable universe
those numbers are surely in a very narrow band
round zero maybe a band of width ten triangle
four so these are the numbers that we can have a
hope of seeing perhaps and that means that most of
these numbers in here are really invisible to us
in the sense that we have no hope of writing them
down in any reasonable fashion using while using
the operations of arithmetic that we have our at
our disposal alright so this diagram suggests
that there are going to be problems factoring
said and in our next video I want to address
that more specifically and more concretely and
we really want to really acknowledge this this
idea that really they unique factorization of
Zed is an impossible dream hope you'll join me for
that i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening